.. title: Some ethical concerns of Theoretical Materials Science
.. slug: some-ethical-concerns-of-theoretical-materials-science
.. date: 2016-12-26 06:34:25 UTC+01:00
.. tags: science
.. category: 
.. link: 
.. description: 
.. type: text


My PhD research topic lies in a field of theoretical materials simulations and therefore I'm not that close to a potential military applications compared to my friends from materials engineering department. Damaging someone's reputation by exposing their sexual-transmitted diseases picked up during my blood-test-related measurement is also not something of my concern, as it would be the case with medical studies.

Consider `my latest publication <http://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/10.1021/acs.jpca.6b08633>`_. It is a mostly methodological paper that describes details on how to apply our in-house developed method to a particular material. The material is represented by a simulation cell which is a fancy way of saying «iron atoms in a funny placed positions». The material is squeezed to the densities comparable to the ones that can be found in the inner core of our planet. It also simultaneously heated up to a 2000 degree Kelvin, which is roughly one-fifth of the Sun's surface temperature (but maybe only one-third of the temperature in the same region of Earth's inner core). 

Nothing of this can be even remotely connected to the military applications. However, similar pressures (maybe just twice as lower) and similar temperatures *might* occur during explosions. I have no idea if the pure iron is used in combat operations (I would suspect it should be rather some iron-based alloy), but it might be that my research can predict a spontaneous phase transition in such compound. Which in turn can be later triggered by a blast from a bomb. Which was just peacefully happen to be detonated nearby. The amount of unlikeliness of this to happen is what allows me to calmly sleep at night.

The other possible connection to the field of ethics of that particular paper can lie in the medical applications. The main feature of the method that was used to study iron at those conditions is a clever way of accounting for lattice vibrations in various material properties. Those lattice vibrations tends to be quite important when studying titanium based alloys which are overwhelmingly employed in prosthetic applications. Titanium itself is a popular choice there because it is non-toxic, but titanium by itself is quite bendy. And you probably do not want that when you replacing a part of your patient's skeleton. So here comes the research problem formulation: out of a set of materials (in this case titanium-based alloys) find the ones that are strong enough to withstand typical human-related patterns of motion, simultaneously being non-toxic. You don't want your patient to go up a stairs and find out his new titanium hip replacement not only won't allow him to move his hip in a desired way, but also poisoning him in the process. While I myself is no expert in picking up a non-poisoning compound, I do take full responsibility for prediction of whether or not the lattice vibrations in that material would withstand the application. Fortunately (for me in this case), the medical field has a tedious multi-step process for introducing new findings to the final customer. Hopefully it includes the experimental verification that would mimic the stairs elevation pattern.

The other ethical question that bothers me with my research is that my contribution to the overall life quality improvement of mankind as a whole is too miniscule. Would humanity be better of if I was making eco-friendly light-bulbs in a factory somewhere in a rural part of my home country? Especially considering that most of my actual research job is drinking coffee while solving complicated multi-dimensional differential equations on a supercomputer? We may never know, but at least I'm not someone from a philosophy department. I have no idea how those guys rationalize the practical application of their work when applying for grants.

Nevertheless, picking on social sciences aside, I would like to take a closer look on the other side of my research — not the product of it, but the process itself. The theoretical framework and approximations that are necessary to carry out my research are tend to be quite complex. The more inclusive you are trying to be with your model, the more complicated the equations become. We, as a scientists of my field, are way over that blackboard-and-chalk-solvable level of complexity. Sure, the physics itself can be outlined on a napkin [#]_, but to get to the actual numbers takes «a few more steps». Some of them might even led to a development of a whole new field, for example computational mathematics and computer science. Those fields then are employed to create complicated programs which are running on supercomputers — multiple computers grid connected via fast network. Those supercomputers a both powerful and power-hungry. The second-largest supercomputer in Europe is located in Jülich, Germany. The population of Jülich is roughly 32 thousand people and the supercomputer center consumes as much power as the whole city!

The computer codes that are used in my field are, in most cases, written by physicists and not computer scientists or professionally trained programmers. This means that they tend to be non-optimized, they utilize weird input formats and, they often contain bugs. So basically, like a real-world applications. The main difference between a cat-dating app in someone's smartphone and those codes that it usually hard to motivate spending precious PhD student's time on a computer program optimization. One of the most popular reason I heard when I raised that question is that if one really want to do that, you should go to the computer science department (and then end up writing cat dating smartphone apps). Because why would you waste your time doing that and not physics, right? Meanwhile computers run inefficiently, wasting electricity and possibly producing errors. In a sense, while this *technically* is not contradicting `Uppsala code <http://ethics.iit.edu/ecodes/node/5841>`_ («Research shall be so directed that its **applications and other consequences** do not cause significant ecological damage»), it is contributing to the climate problems we as a humans experience at the moment. Therefore, my research, including myself, being a representative of scientists, supposedly the most intelligent subgroup of humans (who are, in turn, the most intelligent subgroup of species of this planet), is directly contributing to those problems.

I thought that my field is mostly harmless, but when I launched this train of thoughts I've became a bit depressed. You know the saying «Alcohol can't kill you if you're dead inside»? This semester I've seen a poster in the University corridor (still there, by the way), which says, in big letters «Why are you doing what you're doing?». It is right next to the cafeteria, so I see it at least twice a day. And that had much more impact on the emptiness inside that I feel when I force my magical elves to run some numbers for me on a supercomputer. Probably I should just deal with my caffeine addiction.

.. [#] I did that once in a pub to impress a particular slightly intoxicated female. As it tends to be with those sort of tricks, they won't work outside the realms of outdated Hollywood movies.
